# Javascript

**JavaScript** is a lightweight, interpreted, or just in time compiled programming langugae wiht 1st class functions. 

Although its most well known as the scripting language for Web pages, many non browswer environments also use it such as *node.js* and *adobe acrobat*. 

JS is a prototype based, multi-paradigm, single threaded, dynamic language, supporting object-oriented, imperative, and declarative styles. 

JS capabilities - runtime object construction, variable parameter lists, function variables, dynamic script creation, object introspection, and source-code recovery.

**JavaScript is** ***not*** **Interpreted Java**. Java and JavaScript are registered trademarks of Oracle in the US. 

## Introduction to JavaScript - basic output

Traditionally JS was used inside web browsers such as Mozilla Firefox, Internet Explorer, Chrome, Opera, or Safari. The author would incluce some JS code in the HTML page the user receives when they visit a website. That JS code would run in the brower.

The most well known environment to run JS on the server is Node.js.

**There are 3 major parts of what we refer to as "JavaScript"**.

1. The language itself. 

2. The DOM API - how the language can interact with the various parts of the webpage while in the browser. 

3. The server API provided by Node.js or one of the other server side systems. 

Here are a few examples we can run in a browser. 

#### Declarations

JS has 3 kinds of variable declarations

*variables are symbolic names in your application. the names of variables called identifiers conform to certain rules* 

* A JS identifier usually starts with a letter, underscore, or dollar sign. 

A variable may belong to one of the following scopes:

* **global scope**: the default scope for all code runninng in script mode

* **module scope**: the scope for code running in module mode.

* **funtion scope**: the scope created with a function.

***A global variable is decalred outside of any function and its available to any code; when you declare a a local variable its only available within that funtion***

A **block statement** is used to group zero or more statements and delimited by a pair of curly brackets.

`var` - declares a varibale, optionally initializing it to a value

`let` - declares a block-scoped, local variable, optionally initializing it to a value

`const` - declares a block-scoped, read-only named constant

**Editor or IDE**

On MS windows you can use notepad. Any text editor can be used.

**Embed or include** 

You can either embed JS code directly inside the html file or you can put a line in the html file that will include the external JS file. 

You need to add `<script>` opening and `</script>` closting tags. Write JS code in b/w.

**Input Output**

How do we interact with the JS code running in the browser? There are many ways JS can display text for user output. The most simple is using the `alert` function. 

**alert** 

This will show a pop up in the browser with the text. The `alert()` function is rarwly used but its an easy way to show the use of JS. 

ex of js/alert.html

`<script language="javascript">`

`alert("Hello World");`

`</script>`

Create a file with an html extension and open editor. Open browser with File/Open file menu option. 

**document.write**

ex. of js/document_write.html

`First Line`

`<script>`

`document.write("<h1>Hello World</h1>");`

`</script> `

`Last line`

In this example we have some text then the JS cdoe and then some more text. The JS code uses the `document.write` funtion to change the content of the page. It will embed the html snippet `<h1>Hello World</h1>` after the first line, but before the last line. 

This funtion was often used when one wanted to change what's shown. 

**console.log**

How developers print out debugging information

ex of js/console.html

`<script>`

`console.log("Hello World");`

`</script>`

Most web browsers have what is called a JS console. Its an addtl window thats not normally visible where the browser can print out warnings and errors generated by the execution of the JS code. The developer can also print information to this console using the `console.log()` call.

In order to see the console you need to open it.

## JavaScript input w/ promt and confirm

Two ways to receive input

**prompt**

`prompt` will show a pop up window with the text provided as the first parameter and w/ a textbox the user can fill in. when the user presses `ok` the value in the text box will be returned by the `prompt()` funtion. 

ex. of js/prompt.html

`<script>`

`var name = prompt("Your name:", "");`

`document.write("Hello ", name);`

`</script>`

The textbox will be pre-filled with the content of the 2nd parameter. this is usefull if we want the user to edit some value we can prefull the box with the old value

ex. of js/edit.html

`<script>`

`var name = prompt("Please correct your e-mail address:", "foo@bar.co");`
`document.write("Your e-mail address is ", name);`

`</script>`

*In either case, if the user presses `cancel` or hits the `ESC` the `prompt()` funtion will return `null`.

**confirm**

The other pop up isnt really an input method. It allows the developer to ask a Yes or No question. Calling the `confirm()` funtion will show a pop up window with the provided texts with 2 buttons. If the user presses `OK` the `confirm()` function will return `true` if the user presses `cancel` or hits the `ESC` key the function will return `false`. 

In order for this to make sense you have to understand what `true` and `false` really mean and what this `if-else` construct does. 

That code basically means:

`"If the user presses OK when we asked "Shall I print Hello World?", then print "Hello World", otherwise print "OK, I won't print it."`

ex. of js/confirm.html

`<script>`

`if (confirm("Shall I print Hello` 

`World?")) {`

    `document.write("Hello World");`

`} else {`

   `document.write("OK, I won't print`

`it.");`

`}`

`</script>`


